
CHANGES MADE TO THE NAUT ROSTER SINCE BARIS


---------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

 - Credits & Background
 - Typos and Transliteration
 - Misplacements
 - Black Astronauts
 - Fictional Astronauts & Cosmonauts (Male)
 - Female Astronauts & Cosmonauts

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

CREDITS & BACKGROUND

In February 2008 it was noticed that a few of the Soviet names weren't 
quite right, and so the Cosmonaut Mod was created correct them.  (It formed
the kernel of the "Typos and Transliteration" section below.)  Then in May,
a fellow named Anton wrote to say it was incomplete, as some typos had been
missed--and that a couple changes shouldn't have been made.  As a native 
Russian speaker, he was a valuable resource for getting the cosmonaut names
right.

That prompted a closer look at the roster to see what other changes were in
order.  In addition to typos and transliteration issues, there were
nonhistorical names and an effort was made to replace them with people who 
had actually served in the space program, but didn't make it into BARIS for
whatever reason.  Along the way it was also noticed there were a few who 
were out of place chronologically.

Leon had some email conversations with Fritz Bronner, Michael McCarty, and 
Erik Anderson that June, concerning how the roster was originally created. 
That gave a feel for what would be appropriate to change and what was best
left alone.  Their prompt and considered responses were an enormous help.  
The goal was to make the roster as historically accurate as possible, while 
minimizing disruption of the original list.  Without their help it would 
have been difficult to know where to strike that balance.

When BARIS was being put together, the developers relied heavily on Michael
Cassutt's book "Who's Who in Space: the First 25 Years" and on 
conversations with Mr. Cassutt, plus some books in Ukrainian that were sent
to the developers from an acquaintance in Russia.  They used certain 
outstanding individuals (e.g. Leonov) to establish a "baseline of the 
best", and tinkered with the numbers based on certain persons having 
exceptional skills in one category or another.  For the rest, they 
generally scattered 0s, 1s, and 2s around randomly.

As mentioned above, some of the names in the original roster are fictional.
On the Soviet side it was done partly because detailed information was just
becoming available in the West, so the names weren't all known.  Why it 
happened on the US side is unclear, but some astronauts were either made up
entirely or belonged to contributors to the game (e.g. Joyce, Kowato, 
Anderson).  With online research, and using a copy of Cassutt's book for 
reference, many invented names have been replaced with real ones.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

TYPOS AND TRANSLITERATION

Clearly the developers went to a lot of trouble researching those who 
served in the two space programs, and the time and effort that must have 
gone into assigning skills to each of them must have been a task.  It was 
also likely a pain to type in all those long, tricky names for the 
cosmonauts.

But some of the names do have typos, and for the sake of historical 
accuracy we feel it's worthwhile to get them right, especially considering 
the game is sometimes touted for its educational potential.  Fritz agreed 
with the idea of correcting the names, and said that the changes that had 
been made at that time looked good to him.

Also, beyond the historical and educational concerns, some of the typos 
were rather distracting.  Some, like "Gurragacha", just didn't sound 
right: "Gurra-gotcha?" ...And "Voloshiw" was confusing--his name sounded 
Polish rather than Russian


ASTRONAUT TYPOS

There were three typos among the astronauts:

Basset        -> Bassett       (Group III)
Garriot       -> Garriott      (Group IV)
Overmeyer     -> Overmyer      (Group IV)


COSMONAUT TYPOS

There were a few more on the Soviet side:

Denim         -> Dyomin        (Group I)
Ponomarera    -> Ponomaryova   (Group I) [Female]
Kuzinetsova   -> Kuznetsova    (Group I) [Female]
Yegrov        -> Yegorov       (Group II)
Feokistov     -> Feoktistov    (Group II)
Beregovi      -> Beregovoy     (Group II)
Giazkov       -> Glazkov       (Group II)
Rukaishnikov  -> Rukavishnikov (Group III)
Artyukin      -> Artyukhin     (Group III)
Anokhni       -> Anokhin       (Group IV)
Gurragacha    -> Gurragchaa    (Group IV) *
Remekou       -> Remek         (Group IV) *
Leveikin      -> Laveykin      (Group IV)
Steekalov     -> Strekalov     (Group IV)
Voloshiw      -> Voloshin      (Group IV)
Varlarmov     -> Varlamov      (Group V)
Nelyubv       -> Nelyubov      (Group V)

 * Gürragchaa and Remek were part of the Interkosmos program, in which the 
   USSR invited certain countries, largely from the East Bloc, to send two 
   persons to be trained as cosmonauts and serve on Soyuz spacecraft.  
   Gürragchaa was from Mongolia.  Remek was from Czechoslovakia, and was 
   the first person other than an American or Soviet to fly in space.  
   Other Interkosmos participants who made it into BARIS were Ivanov 
   (Bulgaria), Jaehn (East Germany), and Tuan (Vietnam).  Volk was ethnic 
   German, but was a Soviet citizen.

There are some other names that aren't necessarily wrong, but whose 
transliteration is bad, or might be shaky.  Some of these are really 
judgement calls.  Some were changed to spellings that are more commonly 
used today; with others misleading transliterations were corrected (e.g., 
"Lebedev" is actually pronounced closer to "Lyebedev"), with the help 
of a native Russian speaker at Leon's office.

Komorov      -> Komarov      (Group I)
Guberev      -> Gubaryev     (Group II)
Solovyev     -> Solovyov     (Group IV)
Lebedev      -> Lyebedev     (Group IV)
Berezovoi    -> Berezovoy    (Group IV)
Leveikin     -> Laveykin     (Group IV)
Kolessniicov -> Kolesnikov   (Group IV)
Fastovets    -> Fastovyets   (Group V)
Boroday      -> Borodai      (Group V)
Filateev     -> Filatyev     (Group V)


SOURCES:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_astronauts_by_selection
          http://www.spacefacts.de/english/bio_cosm.htm
          (shows names in the original Cyrillic, which was very helpful)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

MISPLACEMENTS

Not all the spacemen in the roster are in reasonable chronological order.  
Of course, it's to be expected that BARIS would fudge a bit, since 
historical recruitments were more complicated than BARIS's Group I through 
V.  As an example, the US had military astronauts for the X-20 and MOL, 
some of whom later transferred to NASA.  Still, BARIS did things like put 
Lawyer (1965) in Group V, while Haise (1966) was back in Group III.  We 
didn't want to go through the entire list, but thought it was important 
to correct the most glaring discrepancies--members of the first US and 
Soviet recruitments who found themselves down at the bottom in Group V.


ASTRONAUTS

Two astronauts from the Man In Space Soonest program (which predated 
Mercury!) are in Group V.  However that happened, it was easy enough to 
move them up to Group I and II slots that had fictitious names.

GRP  MISSING   CA LM EV DO EN   REPLACEMENT (Recruitment)
 I   Cox        3  1  0  2  2   Kincheloe   (Man In Space Soonest)
II   Verrne     1  2  2  1  3   Rushworth   (Man In Space Soonest, 2nd grp)

Kincheloe replaced Cox, largely because he was one of the best pilots in 
the X-15 program (Cassutt, 164).  It also made more sense to place him in 
the Group I slot, since he was recruited earlier than Rushworth.


COSMONAUTS

Four members of the first Soviet recruitment are down in Group V, replaced 
by men who were recruited years later.  This was likely due to the paucity 
of information in 1992; these guys weren't well-known, and none flew in 
space.  All four were removed for disciplinary reasons (Rafikov had marital
issues that got out of hand; Nelyubov, Anikeyev, and Filatyev picked a 
fight with the police).  The authorities airbrushed them out of early 
photos to avoid bringing embarrassment to the space program, which helped 
fuel rumors that they were instead killed on space missions 
(http://www.straightdope.com/columns/030117.html).

So probably the BARIS designers knew them only as names of former 
cosmonauts with no indication when they joined the space team, and they've 
been swapped them with candidates from Group I who were hired after the 
first Soviet recruitment.  Nelyubov was one of the best pilots in the group
(Cassutt, 221), so he went in the spot with the highest Capsule skill.  
The others we matched up as best we could to the skills of the folks we
swapped them with.

GRP COSMONAUT     CA LM EV DO EN       GRP COSMONAUT        CA LM EV DO EN
 I  Gulyayev       2  0  1  2  2   ->   V  Nelyubov/Nelyubv  1  0  2  1  0
 I  Dyomin/Denim   1  0  0  1  1   ->   V  Filatyev/Filateev 1  0  0  1  1
 I  Zudov          1  1  2  0  2   ->   V  Rafikov           1  0  3  1  0
 I  Rozhdestvensky 1  0  1  1  1   ->   V  Anikeyev          2  0  1  2  0

Additionally, there are two duplicates in the list of cosmonauts.  

Lebedev showed in Groups III and IV.  Historically he was chosen in the 
same group as Andreyev, so we've kept him in Group IV (but updated the 
spelling of his name).  To replace the Group III Lebedev we chose 
Kozelskiy, who was recruited in the same group as Kovalyonok and Malyshev, 
who are also Group III.  There were others in Lyebedev's group missing from
the 'Naut Roster, all unflown, but Kozelskiy was at least chosen for a 
mission backup crew.
  Lebedev (Group III) -> Kozelskiy
  Lebedev (Group IV)  -> Lyebedev
Giazkov showed in Groups II and IV.  He flew on a Soyuz mission, so we've 
kept him in Group II (where he has better stats), but corrected his name, 
and to replace him in Group IV we selected Bugrov, who never flew a 
mission.
  Giazkov (Group II) -> Glazkov
  Giazkov (Group IV) -> Bugrov


SOURCES:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_astronauts_by_selection
          http://www.spacefacts.de/english/bio_cosm.htm

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

BLACK ASTRONAUTS

When this mod was updated in 2010, we meant to replace both Kowato and 
Ferguson.  There weren't enough historical astronauts left (that we could 
find) to fill both slots, so we thought we'd take the opportunity to honor 
our first black astronaut in space, Guion Bluford...except apparently we 
missed doing that, somehow.

As it turns out, in July 2019 Leon learned of Edward Dwight, who was a 
famous astronaut candidate in the first half of the '60s (which made him 
surprised he'd not heard of him before).  He had impressive credentials and
was effectively sponsored by the Kennedy Administration, which wanted some 
diversity in the astronaut corps and saw to it he was admitted to the 
Aerospace Research Pilot School (ARPS) at Edwards Air Force Base.

The president's assassination in 1963 removed that base of support, which 
sank what little chance he had of joining NASA.  Typical of the time, most 
of his peers at Edwards felt he didn't belong, and behaved accordingly.  
Chuck Yeager, the school commandant (and coincidentally Dwight's hero), 
didn't want him there and treated him shamefully.  Though he graduated, 
NASA didn't select him for the Group 3 recruitment in October 1963.  When 
Kennedy was killed the following month, he found himself effectively 
grounded, his career at a dead end.  He finally resigned from the Air Force
in 1966.

Dwight would make a much better candidate than Bluford since he was around 
during the Space Race, and Group III seems the most appropriate place for 
him since he applied for the same group that Aldrin was admitted to.  
Scott's place would be a good choice, since Dwight was a good pilot, and 
Scott could be moved down to the Musgrave/Ellis slot, giving him even 
better CA skill (he did, after all, command Apollo 15).  Then Musgrave 
could be moved down to the Ferguson slot we meant to modify earlier.

GROUP III
 Scott          -> Dwight (ARPS)
GROUP IV
 Musgrave/Ellis -> Scott (Group 3)
GROUP V
 Ferguson       -> Musgrave (Group 6)

SOURCES:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ed_Dwight
          https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/16/us/ed-dwight-was-set-to-be-the-first-black-astronaut-heres-why-that-never-happened.html

In addition, Major Robert Lawrence in Group V was America's first black 
astronaut.  He was a military astronaut who was chosen for the MOL program 
in 1967, but was tragically killed in a training accident several months 
later.  It's a real shame he never had a chance to go into space.

SOURCE:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Henry_Lawrence_Jr.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

FICTIONAL ASTRONAUTS AND COSMONAUTS (MALE)

There may be some confusion here between historical and BARIS recruitment 
numbers.  Conveniently, while BARIS uses Roman numerals, NASA and the 
Soviets seem to have used Arabic.  So in this document, Roman numerals 
indicate (BA)RIS recruitments, and Arabic numerals represent historical 
ones.


MALE ASTRONAUTS

There are fourteen astronauts in BARIS that we can't find any historical 
record of (some are the names of people involved in BARIS development), and
two who were misplaced, Rushworth and Kincheloe.

GRP  MISSING   CA LM EV DO EN   REPLACEMENT (Recruitment)
II   Kelly      1  2  2  1  3   A.White     (Man In Space Soonest)
II   Joyce      1  2  2  1  3   R.White     (Man In Space Soonest)
II   Matthews   1  2  2  1  3   Crossfield  (Man In Space Soonest)
II   Peters     1  2  2  1  3   Peterson    (Man In Space Soonest, 2nd grp)
III  Covert     1  2  0  1  2   McCandless  (Group 5)
IV   Ellis      3  1  1  1  2   Dwight      (ARPS)
                   (previously) Musgrave    (Group 6)
IV   James      1  0  3  1  2   Llewellyn   (Group 6)
IV   Gentry     2  2  0  0  2   Henize      (Group 6)
 V   Henderson  2  1  2  0  1   Allen       (Group 6)
 V   Anderson   2  2  1  1  2   Holmquest   (Group 6)
 V   Rogue      1  2  0  3  1   O'Leary     (Group 6)
 V   Buchard    2  2  0  1  2   Lenoir      (Group 6)
 V   Kowato     1  2  1  3  1   Thornton    (Group 6)
 V   Ferguson   1  2  1  1  0   (special - see above)
GRP  MISPLACED CA LM EV DO EN   REPLACEMENT (Recruitment)
 V   Rushworth  2  3  0  3  2   Parker      (Group 6)
 V   Kincheloe	2  2  2  1  0   Chapman     (Group 6)

Man In Space Soonest included two guys named White: Alvin and Robert.  
Considering his EV rating, the White in the original roster must have been 
Edward, the first American to perform a spacewalk.  So he was renamed 
E.White and the others added as A.White and an R.White, just as the female 
candidates (appropriately) include a J.Dietrich and an M.Dietrich.  
McCandless fit neatly into Group III since he was from Group 5 instead of 
6.  Placement of the other Group II astronauts is in no particular order, 
as they all have the same skills.

At first Groups IV and V were assigned in alphabetical order, but then 
modified a little for their skills, based on what could be told from their 
histories in Cassutt's book.  Musgrave was an accomplished pilot, so he 
took Ellis's spot (though he was moved later).  Allen seemed to have some 
EVA and piloting skills, so he went into Henderson's place.  Chapman was 
also a pilot, so he replaced Kincheloe.  Llewellyn and O'Leary likely had 
low pilot skills, so they filled in for James and Rogue respectively.  
And Thornton seems to have had low Endurance (he suffered space sickness), 
so he took Kowato's place.

Feel like giving someone from another country a chance to go into space?  
Chapman was from Australia and Llewellyn was from Wales, though both had 
become US citizens.


MALE COSMONAUTS

There are seven cosmonauts in BARIS we can't find any historical record of,
mostly from Group V.  The Soviets' Air Force Group 3 includes twelve who 
didn't make it into BARIS.  These missing men never flew in space, though 
some served as "doubles" (backups) to Soyuz flights.  Still, why not use 
obscure but real cosmonauts rather than fictional ones?  For our fictional 
Group IV cosmonaut, we used someone from Air Force Group 2 who was
recruited at the same time as Matinchenko, who's right under him in the 
'naut roster.

Very little information is available for these fellows, but we used what we 
could find at http://www.spacefacts.de/english/bio_cosm.htm to try to place
them.  Lisun and Preobrazhensky were chosen since they served as backups 
for various Soyuz flights.  Then Shcheglov since he was assigned to a Soyuz
flight (as a backup, perhaps), though it was later canceled.  We also chose 
Khludeyev and Styepanov, as they worked on Buran (Styepanov also worked on 
Salyut and Almaz).  Lastly, Fyodorov and Petrushenko were included mainly 
for their longevity in the space program, as they stayed into the 1970s.

GRP  MISSING   CA LM EV DO EN   REPLACEMENT
IV   Zykov      2  1  0  2  3   Kuklin          (backup for Soyuz 5)
 V   Butenko    1  1  2  1  1   Lisun           (backup for Soyuz 23 & 24)
 V   Muraviov   1  2  0  2  3   Preobrazhensky  (backup for Soyuz 24)
 V   Ozoga      2  1  3  1  0   Shcheglov       (assigned to Soyuz 23)*
 V   Lazovich   0  1  2  3  1   Khludeyev       (worked on Buran)
 V   Dobrynin   1  0  0  2  3   Fyodorov
 V   Bekelov    1  0  2  2  1   Stepanov/Styepanov (wkd Buran,Salyut,Almaz)
 V   Yurimanko  0  1  0  3  1   Petrushenko

Shcheglov took Ozoga's place, since he was a pilot. Khludeyev and Styepanov
were given spots with good EVA and Docking, as it was assumed that 
preparing for Buran (and the space stations) would have given them skills 
in those areas, or that they would have been chosen based on having those 
skills.  It's a stretch, for sure, but we're working from very little 
information here.  After that, we tried to assign Lisun and Preobrazhensky 
to the best remaining skill sets, since they had at least served as Soyuz 
backups, and the other two (Fyodorov and Petrushenko) filled the spots that
were left.

* See http://www.astronautix.com/astros/shceglov.htm


---------------------------------------------------------------------------

FEMALE ASTRONAUTS AND COSMONAUTS

The women were a bit harder to do, mainly because there were very few 
female recruitments in the Space Race.  Did you assume the US names were 
all made up?  Leon did, until he stumbled on a reference to the Mercury 13 
(see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mercury_13 & www.mercury13.com).  The men
of the Mercury 7 were tested and trained by a private contractor, the 
Lovelace Foundation.  Afterward, Dr. Lovelace was curious how women would 
perform on the same tests, so he tested a group of female pilots, starting 
with Jerrie Cobb.  It's important to remember that this was a private 
venture; NASA didn't ask for it, pay for it, or even know about it at 
first, and it wasn't done at NASA facilities.  But still, it was performed 
by the same organization that tested the Mercury 7, and the tests were 
otherwise identical or actually tougher.

Contrary to expectations, the women scored just as well as the men (partly,
no doubt, because they had the men's scores to aim for).  But as the group 
was about to follow Cobb into Phase III testing with the Navy, NASA 
abruptly called a halt to it.  Because of Lovelace's prestige and clout 
with NASA, it had been willing to let him do some testing on the side, even
to the point of having a woman complete all three phases--but a group of 
thirteen was going too far and would attract attention.  NASA had no 
intention of using female astronauts, and said so.  The Navy was willing to
let the foundation use its facilities if NASA wanted the tests done, but 
without that approval, it wouldn't make its facilities available--and so, 
the testing was canceled.

Cobb and Hart (the wife of a senator) lobbied Congress and vice president 
Lyndon Johnson, who was polite but unhelpful.  They got the same treatment 
from members of the Senate.  The House did finally agree to hold hearings 
on whether women were being unfairly discriminated against in the space 
program: bear in mind this was two years before sex discrimination in
employment became illegal.  Cobb and Hart testified that NASA was actively
discriminating against women, and that the qualifications specifically 
excluded women.  NASA representatives testified piously that no, of course 
not, it was just that jet test pilots were needed for the astronaut corps. 
The fact that the military only allowed men to become test pilots was 
strictly coincidental (and no doubt convenient).

The country's foremost female pilot, Jackie Cochran, also testified.  She 
was a long-time friend of Dr. Lovelace and had muscled her way into the 
picture.  She wasn't young and healthy enough to be tested herself, so she 
focused her efforts on replacing Cobb as the group's de facto spokesperson.
In the hearings, she obligingly testified that she didn't think women were 
being discriminated against, that NASA shouldn't have female astronauts at 
that time, but that there should be a long-term program to test and study 
how women would perform.  Such a program would of course need an 
experienced pilot to lead it, and she just happened to be available.

Cochran's and NASA's testimony sounded reasonable, and included enough 
noncommital statements that something should be done toward putting women 
in space, that it was easy for the commission to let the matter drop.  In 
retrospect, the deck was stacked against the Mercury 13 from the start, and
it would have been remarkable if anything had come of these hearings.  This
was an era when a woman couldn't secure a loan without a man's signature, 
couldn't buy carpet without her husband's okaying it with the vendor, and 
female pilots were considered tomboyish or worse.  Female astronauts were 
exotic, if not downright suspect.  Society wasn't ready for women to join 
the men in space, and NASA was an old boys' club that was even slower than 
society as a whole to adapt to changes in coming years.  It effectively 
missed the Civil Rights Movement.

The Soviets, meanwhile, went ahead with the idea of a woman in space.  It's
not too much to say that they did it just to do it, to beat the Americans 
to a space first--but still, they did in fact recruit five official female 
cosmonauts.  In 1963 they put a woman into space, much to the chagrin of 
the Mercury 13.  The USSR never did it again, though, until 1982--about 
when (and because) the US finally did it.  Voskhod 5 was going to have an 
all-female crew (http://www.spacefacts.de/cancelled/english/voskhod-5.htm),
but it was canceled with the rest of the Voskhod program.  There were no 
plans to fly a Soyuz crew with women aboard, so all but Tereshkova resigned
from the space program in October 1969.

One complication with spacewomen in BARIS is whether to refer to them by 
their married or maiden names.  We've chosen to use their names at the time
they were being tested or when they joined the group, which is also what 
BARIS seems to have generally done.  This often means using maiden names, 
considering the age at which 'nauts are recruited, though not always.  If 
any of them are wrong, please let us know.


FEMALE ASTRONAUTS

For the Americans, BARIS used the Mercury 13 for Groups I and II, but 
not for Group III.  The idea was that by that time (ca. 1968), the original
Thirteen would have been too old for consideration.  But on a closer look, 
some of them would have been younger in 1968 than the oldest (Hart) was 
when Mercury 13 began.  So it's still feasible to use them--shaky, to be 
sure, but probably better than just making up names, and this allows us to 
honor more members of that group.

Hurrle was Allison's maiden name, and her name at the time of testing.  She
didn't become Mrs. Allison until after the tests were canceled.  This is 
one exception to BARIS using the name that was current during participation
in a program, but this was probably accidental on the developers' part--she
married shortly after cancellation.

For Moore and Roland in Group III, we used Funk and Gorelick.  Funk is 
especially appropriate: she was the youngest of the group 
(http://history.nasa.gov/flats.html), and for years kept trying to find a 
way to get into space somehow, even if only as a passenger.  After 
cancellation, she managed to continue testing on the side.  When she took 
the centrifuge test, she withstood five Gs without a pressure suit, which 
amazed the personnel running the test.  She also later became a test 
pilot--she was still doing that in 2003, and was the pilot for one of the 
entrants in the Ansari X-Prize 
(http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2003/07/0709_030709_tvspacewoman.html).
As a result she went into Roland's slot, which has the highest Capsule and 
Endurance skills.  Gorelick was also one of the younger members of the 
group, and had an engineering background--so it made sense to include her, 
and she took Moore's place.

Beeson is Fritz's wife's maiden name, and for RIS on SourceForge it was 
left alone as a sort of easter egg.  It's a holdover from Liftoff!, in 
which both she and Fritz, and other developers, were recruitable US 
astronauts.  For RIS on GitHub she's been replaced by Stumbough, since she 
was easily the youngest member of the group who hadn't been included 
already.

ORIGINAL    CA LM EV DO EN  CHANGE

Allison      2  1  0  1  2  Hurrle [maiden name] (later Woltman)
Cagle        2  2  1  2  3  --
Cobb         3  0  1  1  2  --

J.Dietrich   2  2  1  0  2  --
M.Dietrich   2  1  2  1  2  --
Hart         1  2  1  2  1  -- (nee Briggs)

Beeson       1  2  1  1  2  Stumbough (later Jessen)
Moore        2  1  1  0  2  Gorelick (later Ratley)
Roland       3  0  2  0  3  Funk

Mercury 13 members not in the mod or the original roster:
Sloan (nee Hamilton, later Truhill)
Hixson
Leverton
Steadman (nee Trimble)

SOURCES:  "Promised the Moon: The Untold Story of the First Women
            in the Space Race", by Stephanie Nolen
          "The Mercury 13: The True Story of Thirteen Women and 
            the Dream of Space Flight", by Martha Ackmann and 
            Lynn Sherr


FEMALE ASTRONAUTS IN RIS 2.0

The roster underwent revision again when we added female candidates to 
Groups IV and V.  Hart was moved into Group I, since she was the oldest 
of the Mercury 13.  Her place in Group II went to Hixson.  In Group III, 
Stumbough, Gorelick, and Funk were replaced with Steadman, Leverton, and 
Hurrle.  Group IV now has Stumbough, Gorelick, and Sloan.  Group V has 
Funk, Lucid, and Seddon, the latter two being early female US astronauts.


FEMALE COSMONAUTS

For the cosmonauts, BARIS used the first Soviet female recruitment, but 
only three of them--Ponomaryova, Tereshkova, and Kuznetsova--seem to have 
been known in the West in 1992.  Two women from the second recruitment--
Savitskaya and Ivanova--were substituted, though they fell outside the time
period of BARIS.  The other four spots were filled with made-up names, some
of them incorrectly done (e.g., Pilmov is the masculine form; a woman would
be called Pilmova).

We added the two missing members of the first recruitment, Solovyova and 
Yorkina.  Also Yefremova, Kvasova, Sokolova, and Borzenkova, who were 
finalists but were ultimately turned down for the program:
http://www.astronautix.com/astros/sokolova.htm
http://epizodsspace.testpilot.ru/bibl/spaceflight/2006/01.html
http://books.google.com/books?id=VL5TSg2Ut3cC&pg=PA47&lpg=PA47&dq=Sokolova+cosmonaut&source=web&ots=cPKZg-bB6J&sig=uZ56RfZFrDfRwaQRkcAbg-0obQw&hl=en&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=9&ct=result#PPA47,M1

Ivanova wasn't recruited until 1983, so she was removed.  Savitskaya is also 
anachronistic in this game, but in previous versions of this mod we somehow 
missed seeing Borzenkova, so left Savitskaya in for historical reasons: she 
was the second woman to fly in space, and the first to perform a spacewalk 
(which honor would have gone to Solovyova or her backup Yorkina if Voskhod 
5 had flown).  She was also slightly earlier than Ivanova, being recruited 
in 1980.

The open slots--Beligrovo, Volkinski, Renkomorov, Ivanova, and Pilmov--have 
mostly unremarkable skill sets.  Only Renkomorov is a decent CA, so that 
seat went to Sokolova, who was an instructor pilot.  Solovyova was 
considered the toughest of the group 
(http://epizodsspace.testpilot.ru/bibl/spaceflight/2006/01.html), so she 
took Volkinski's place, which has the highest Endurance.

Of the three spots remaining, Ivanova's seems to be marginally the best, so
it went to Yorkina, who was one of those accepted as a cosmonaut.  Since 
Kvasova and Yefremova weren't, and they're known only as names and there's 
no basis to distinguish them from one another in terms of their skill sets,
They went in alphabetically, with Kvasova in the earlier slot.  When we 
later noticed Borzenkova, she took Savitskaya's spot since that one needed 
a replacement.

ORIGINAL    CA LM EV DO EN  CHANGE

Ponomarera   2  2  1  1  2  [Ponomaryova*]
Beligrovo    1  0  1  0  2  Kvasova+
Kuzinetsova  2  0  1  1  2  [Kuznetsova*] (later Pitskhelaura)

Tereshkova   0  1  1  0  1  --
Volkinski    1  1  1  1  3  Solovyova
Renkomorov   2  0  1  1  2  Sokolova+

Ivanova      1  1  1  1  2  Yorkina (later Sergeychik)
Savitskaya   1  1  3  1  2  Borzenkova+
Pilmov       1  2  1  0  1  Yefremova+

  * Change of spelling--see Typos and Transliteration section
  + Finalists who weren't ultimately selected in 1962


FEMALE COSMONAUTS IN RIS 2.0

Group IV now includes Marina Popovich (not Popovicha, apparently), a pilot 
who later became the USSR's first female military test pilot.  Also Tatyana
Morozycheva, who was a strong candidate but wasn't selected.  Finally Irina
Pronina, who became a cosmonaut and was selected for a backup crew.

Group V has Svetlana Savitskaya and Yekaterina Ivanova, real cosmonauts, 
and Yelena Dobrokvashina, since she trained for a Soyuz female mission that
was later canceled.  (Yes, Ivanova's back.)
